WITH CONGRESSIONAL LEADERS TO
DISCUSS HIS STRATEGY TO BATTLE
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS TUESDAY:
THE U.S. INCREASES AID TO WEST
AFRICA TO TREAT AND CONTAIN
EBOLA AS THE DISEASE CLAIMS
NEARLY 2,300 LIVES AND
CONDITIONS ON THE GROUND
UNRAVEL.
>> Ifill: PLUS, HOW DRONES CAN
SAVE FARMERS MONEY AND LIMIT
FERTILIZER RUNOFF FROM POLLUTING
THE GREAT LAKES.
>> AND THIS PLANET CONTINUES TO
HAVE MORE PEOPLE ON IT, SO WE
HAVE TO DO A BETTER JOB AND GET
MORE OUT OF THE LAND WE HAVE TO
GET HIGHER YIELDS TO FEED MORE
AS THIS TECHNOLOGY MOVES FORWARD
ITS GOING TO HELP ME DO A BETTER
JOB AT WHAT I'M DOING AND HELP
AGRICULTURE IN GENERAL.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS "NEWSHOUR."
>> Woodruff: HEALTH OFFICIALS
REPORTED STARK NEW NUMBERS TODAY
IN THE EBOLA OUTBREAK ACROSS
WEST AFRICA.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
SAID CONFIRMED DEATHS HAVE
REACHED NEARLY 2,300 OUT OF
4,200 CASES.
MEANWHILE, A FOURTH AMERICAN AID
WORKER INFECTED WITH THE VIRUS
RETURNED TO THE UNITED STATES
FOR TREATMENT.
THE STILL UNIDENTIFIED PATIENT
WAS SEEN ARRIVING AT EMORY
UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL IN ATLANTA
THIS MORNING.
WE'LL TAKE A CLOSER LOOK AT U.S.
EFFORTS TO FIGHT THE OUTBREAK,
LATER IN THE PROGRAM.
>> Ifill: CARBON DIOXIDE LEVELS
IN THE WORLD'S ATMOSPHERE HIT A
RECORD HIGH LAST YEAR.
THE U.N.'S WEATHER AGENCY
REPORTED TODAY, CONCENTRATIONS
OF THE GAS LAST YEAR ROSE BY THE
MOST ON RECORD.
THEY'RE NOW NEARLY 40% HIGHER
THAN PRE-INDUSTRIAL LEVELS.
THE WORLD METEOROLOGICAL
ORGANIZATION
WARNED THE TREND IS NOT ONLY
WARMING THE EARTH, IT'S
ACCELERATING.
>> THIS YEAR THE IMPORTANT
ADDITIONAL NEWS IS THAT THE RATE
OF INCREASE OF THE FUEL
CONCENTRATION SEE EVEN FASTER
THAN THE PREVIOUS YEAR.
IT WAS FASTEST RATE OVER MORE
THAN 30 YEARS.
>> Ifill: THE SURGE IS TIED TO
INCREASED EMISSIONS AND TO THE
DIMINISHING ABILITY OF THE
OCEANS AND PLANT LIFE TO ABSORB
ANY MORE CARBON DIOXIDE.
MEANWHILE, A SEPARATE REPORT
WARNED OF THE EFFECTS OF WARMING
ON NORTH AMERICAN BIRDS.
THE NATIONAL AUDUBON SOCIETY
SAID 126 SPECIES COULD LOSE HALF
OR MORE OF THEIR HABITAT BY
MID-CENTURY, UNLESS CLIMATE
CHANGE SLOWS.
>> Woodruff: THE DEATH TOLL
KEEPS CLIMBING IN MONSOON
FLOODING ACROSS PAKISTAN AND
INDIAN-CONTROLLED KASHMIR, AFTER
THE HEAVIEST RAIN IN 50 YEARS.
OFFICIALS SAID TODAY MORE THAN
440 PEOPLE HAVE DIED, AND THEY
WARNED HUNDREDS MORE VILLAGES
COULD BE INUNDATED.
HOUSES IN KASHMIR REMAINED UNDER
WATER AS PEOPLE GATHERED ON
ROOFTOPS, WAITING TO BE RESCUED.
MORE THAN 1.5 MILLION PEOPLE ARE
AFFECTED.
>> Ifill: DUTCH AUTHORITIES
ISSUED INITIAL FINDINGS TODAY IN
THE UKRAINE AIR DISASTER THAT
KILLED 298 PEOPLE.
THE REPORT BOLSTERED SUSPICIONS
THAT A MALAYSIAN PLANE WAS SHOT
OUT OF THE SKY.
RICHARD PALLOT OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS HAS THIS REPORT.
>> Reporter: ON ANOTHER MALAYSIA
AIRLINES FLIGHT, TWO MORE BODIES
WERE RETURNED TODAY, ALMOST TWO
MONTHS ON.
FOR THESE FAMILIES IN KUALA
LUMPUR, AT LEAST SOME SORT OF
CLOSURE, MANY RELATIVES STILL DO
NOT HAVE THAT, BUT NOW ALL HAVE
AN OFFICIAL STEER AS TO WHAT
HAPPENED.
A REPORT RELEASED BY CRASH
INVESTIGATORS IN HOLLAND, THE
COUNTRY THAT MORE THAN HALF THE
VICTIMS WERE FROM, CONCLUDING
THAT MH-17 BROKE UP AFTER BEING
HIT BY NUMEROUS OBJECTS AT HIGH
VELOCITY.
PHOTOS CLEARLY DEMONSTRATING THE
HOLES IN THE FUSELAGE, WITH NO
EVIDENCE OF ANY TECHNICAL OR
HUMAN ERROR.
>> THE PATTERN OF DAMAGE TO THE
BODY OF THE AIRCRAFT AND THE
COCKPIT IS CONSISTENT WILL THE
DAMAGEHAUL EXPECTED
WITH A LARGE NUMBER OF HIGH
ENERGY OBJECTS THAT PENETRATED
THE AIRCRAFT.
>> Reporter: IT STOPS SHORT OF
SAYING THE PLANE WAS DEFINITELY
HIT BY SHRAPNEL FROM A MISSILE,
BUT IN REALITY, IT POINTS TO
LITTLE ELSE.
THE REPORT IS BASED ON PURELY
PICTURES AND VIDEOS FROM THE
SCENE, BECAUSE FIGHTING IN THE
AREA HAS MEANT IT'S NOT BEEN
SAFE ENOUGH FOR INVESTIGATORS TO
VISIT.
THE MALAYSIAN GOVERNMENT ARE NOW
>> Reporter: THE BLAME AT THE
MOMENT IS STILL BELIEVED TO BE
WITH PRO-RUSSIAN SEPARATISTS.
THE FINAL REPORT WILL BE
PUBLISHED WITHIN A YEAR.
AT A SIMILAR TIME TO THE
FINDINGS OF A SEPARATE CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATION, THE LARGEST OF
IT'S KIND IN DUTCH HISTORY.
>> Ifill: THE REBELS DENIED
AGAIN TODAY THAT THEY SHOT DOWN
THE PLANE.
A TOP COMMANDER TOLD A RUSSIAN
NEWSPAPER, "WE SIMPLY DON'T HAVE
THE TECHNOLOGY."
>> Woodruff: IN YEMEN, VIOLENCE
BETWEEN SOLDIERS AND SHIITE
PROTESTERS ERUPTED TODAY.
MEDICAL OFFICIALS SAID AT LEAST
FOUR PEOPLE WERE KILLED WHEN
TROOPS FIRED ON A CROWD TRYING
TO STORM THE CABINET BUILDING.
ANTI-GOVERNMENT DEMONSTRATIONS
HAVE GRIPPED THE CAPITAL CITY,
SANAA, FOR WEEKS.
>> Ifill: A FEDERAL JUDGE
IN MIAMI HAS RE-SENTENCED
CONVICTED TERRORIST JOSE PADILLA
TO 21 YEARS IN PRISON.
AN APPEALS COURT HAD RULED THE
ORIGINAL SENTENCE OF 17 YEARS
WAS TOO LENIENT.
PADILLA WAS ORIGINALLY CHARGED,
IN 2002, WITH PLOTTING TO SET
OFF A "DIRTY BOMB" LOADED WITH
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL.
THAT CHARGE WAS LATER DROPPED,
BUT PADILLA WAS ULTIMATELY
CONVICTED OF TAKING PART IN A
TERROR CONSPIRACY.
>> Woodruff: INVESTIGATIONS AT
VETERANS AFFAIRS HOSPITALS HAVE
FOUND WIDESPREAD EFFORTS
TO HIDE DELAYS IN HEALTH CARE.
THE DEPARTMENT'S INSPECTOR
GENERAL TOLD SENATORS TODAY THAT
MANAGERS AT MORE THAN A DOZEN
FACILITIES LIED TO
INVESTIGATORS.
AT THE SAME HEARING, V.A.
SECRETARY ROBERT MCDONALD SAID
THE AGENCY HAS NOW CONTACTED
MORE THAN 266,000 VETERANS TO
GET THEM APPOINTMENTS.
>> Ifill: ON WALL STREET TODAY,
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 97 POINTS TO CLOSE BELOW
17,014.
THE NASDAQ FELL 40 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 4,552.
AND THE S-AND-P 500 DROPPED 13,
TO FINISH AT 1,988.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR:
SENATORS WEIGH IN ON HOW TO
TACKLE ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS.
WHAT THE U.S. IS DOING TO HELP
STOP THE EBOLA OUTBREAK FROM
SPIRALING OUT OF CONTROL.
USING DRONES TO HELP FARMERS
LIMIT FERTILIZER FLOWING INTO
LAKE ERIE.
WHY VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
STAY IN ABUSIVE RELATIONSHIPS
AND HOW TO BREAK THE CYCLE.
AND APPLE UNVEILS A NEW WAY TO
REPLACE YOUR WALLET WITH YOUR
PHONE.
>> Ifill: NOW, HOW TO COMBAT THE
ISLAMIC STATE GROUP, ALSO KNOWN
AS ISIS.
IT'S THE BIGGEST PROBLEM FACING
POLITICAL LEADERS IN WASHINGTON
THIS WEEK.
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA CALLED
CONGRESSIONAL LEADERS TO THE
WHITE HOUSE THIS AFTERNOON TO
REVIEW THE STRATEGY HE'LL
OUTLINE TOMORROW NIGHT FOR THE
NATION.
HE MADE NO PUBLIC COMMENT, BUT
SPOKESMAN JOSH EARNEST SAID THE
PRESIDENT IS LOOKING FOR
CONGRESSIONAL BUY-IN.
>> THE PRESIDENT BELIEVES THAT'S
IMPORTANT BECAUSE HE UNDERSTANDS
THAT CONGRESS HAS AND SHOULD
HAVE A ROLE AS THESE IMPORTANT
DECISIONS ARE BEING MADE.
THIS IS A PRIORITY BECAUSE THE
PRESIDENT BELIEVES THAT WHEN YOU
HAVE THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH AND
THE LEGISLATIVE BRANCH,
DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS
BRIDGING DIVIDES TO PRESENT A
UNITED FRONT, BOTH TO OUR
ENEMIES BUT ALSO TO THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY, IT ONLY
STRENGTHENS THE HAND OF OUR
COUNTRY AS WE CONFRONT THOSE
THREATS.
>> Ifill: BUT THE WHITE HOUSE
WOULD NOT REVEAL IF MR. OBAMA
WILL SEEK FORMAL AUTHORIZATION
TO USE FORCE AGAINST THE
"ISLAMIC STATE" GROUP.
AND, PARTY LEADERS THEMSELVES
REMAINED DIVIDED OVER HOW TO
MOVE FORWARD.
DEMOCRATIC MAJORITY LEADER
SENATOR HARRY REID WAS TAKING A
WAIT-AND-SEE APPROACH.
>> I'M INCLINED TO NOT RUSH INTO
ANYTHING.
TOMORROW THE PRESIDENT IS
ADDRESSING THE NATION.
THAT DOESN'T HAPPEN VERY OFTEN.
AND THURSDAY AFTERNOON WE'RE
HAVING A BRIEFING HERE FROM THE
ADMINISTRATION ON WHAT'S GOING
ON IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
SO I DON'T KNOW HOW OTHERS FEEL,
BUT I'M JUST GOING TO WAIT AND
TRY TO GET THE FACTS.
>> Ifill: REPUBLICAN HOUSE
SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER WAS ALSO
NON-COMMITTAL ABOUT SEEKING A
VOTE.
HE SAID IT DEPENDS ON WHAT'S IN
THE PRESIDENT'S PLAN.
>> WHAT I'M HOPING TO HEAR FROM
THE PRESIDENT TODAY IS A
STRATEGY THAT GOES AFTER ISIS
AND DESTROYS THEM.
WE HAVE A VERY SERIOUS PROBLEM,
AND WHAT WE NEED IS A STRATEGY.
AND UNTIL THERE IS A STRATEGY,
THERE IS NO REASON TO TALK ABOUT
ANY OF THE SPECIFICS.
>> Ifill: BUT SENATE MINORITY
LEADER MITCH MCCONNELL SAID IT'S
IN THE PRESIDENT'S INTEREST AND
THE COUNTRY'S INTEREST TO TAKE
THE ISSUE TO CONGRESS IN
ADVANCE.
>> THE VIEW OF MYSELF AND MOST
OF MY MEMBERS IS THE PRESIDENT
SHOULD BE SEEKING CONGRESSIONAL
APPROVAL PERIOD, FOR WHATEVER HE
DECIDES TO DO BECAUSE THAT'S THE
WAY YOU HEAR FROM THOSE OF US
WHO REPRESENT EVERYONE IN THE
COUNTRY.
THAT'S THE WAY YOU GET
CONGRESSIONAL SUPPORT.
>> Ifill: THE U.S. MILITARY HAS
BEEN CONDUCTING LIMITED AIR
STRIKES AGAINST "ISLAMIC STATE"
FIGHTERS IN IRAQ FOR FOUR WEEKS,
WITHOUT CONGRESSIONAL APPROVAL.
NEW POLLS OUT TODAY FOUND A
MAJORITY OF AMERICANS BELIEVE
IT'S TIME TO RATCHET UP THE
ASSAULT.
A SURVEY BY "THE WASHINGTON
POST" AND A.B.C. NEWS REPORTED
71% OF THOSE POLLED NOW SUPPORT
EXPANDING AIR STRIKES IN IRAQ.
IN ADDITION, 65% BACK STRIKING
"ISLAMIC STATE" BASES INSIDE
SYRIA.
A C.N.N. SURVEY SHOWED SIMILAR
RESULTS.
THE ADMINISTRATION IS ALSO
TRYING TO CREATE AN
INTERNATIONAL COALITION OF
SUPPORTING STATES.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
LEFT WASHINGTON TODAY TO TRAVEL
TO JORDAN AND SAUDI ARABIA.
>> Ifill: FOR THE VIEWS FROM
CAPITOL HILL, WE TURN TO TWO
LAWMAKERS ACTIVELY ENGAGED IN
THE UNFOLDING DEBATE.
REPUBLICAN SENATOR JIM INHOFE OF
OKLAHOMA- THE RANKING MEMBER ON
THE SENATE ARMED SERVICES
COMMITTEE.
AND DEMOCRATIC SENATOR TIM KAINE
OF VIRGINIA, WHO SERVES ON THE
SENATE FOREIGN RELATIONS AND
ARMED SERVICES COMMITTEES.
SENATOR KAINE, I'LL START WITH
YOU SINCE THE DEMOCRATS HAVE THE
MAJORITY IN THE SENATE RIGHT
NOW.
WHAT DO YOU NEED THE HEAR FROM
THE PRESIDENT TOMORROW NIGHT?
>> WELL, GWEN, I'M EXPECTING AND
BASED ON WHAT I'M READING, I'M
OPTIMISTIC ABOUT THE PRESIDENT
LAYING OUT A CRISP DEFINITION OF
WHAT OUR MISSION SHOULD BE TO
STOP THIS ADMITTEDLY SERIOUS
THREAT WITH ISIL.
AND IN PARTICULAR I'M VERY
INTERESTED IN THE WORK THAT THE
ADMINISTRATION HAS BEEN DOING IN
THE LAST FEW WEEKS TO GATHER
OTHER NATIONS WHO WILL SUPPORT
THIS EFFORT.
BECAUSE THEY HAVE A LOT AT RISK.
WE CAN'T POLICE A REGION THAT
WON'T TAKE RESPONSIBILITY TO
POLICE ITSELF.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE THINGS
THAT I'M MOST INTERESTED IN
HEARING TOMORROW NIGHT.
>> Ifill: SENATOR INHOFE,
YOU'VE BEEN CRITICAL OF THIS
PRESIDENT ON THIS AND OTHER
ISSUES.
WHAT DO YOU WANT THE HEAR HIM
SAY?
>> FIRST OF ALL, I WANT HIM TO
TAKE A POSITION AND DEVELOP A
STRATEGY.
GWEN, I'VE BEEN TRYING TO GET
THE PRESIDENT TO COME OUT WITH A
STRATEGY ON THE MIDDLE EAST
SINCE SEPTEMBER OF LAST YEAR.
NOW, OF COURSE, WE'RE WANTING A
STRATEGY SPECIFIC TO ISIS
BECAUSE THAT IS THE THREAT.
AND I'M VERY PROUD OF SECRETARY
HAGEL FOR COMING OUT AND
ARTICULATING THIS AS THE REAL
THREAT TO OUR MAINLAND.
I'M LOOKING FORWARD TO HAVING
HIM COME OUT WITH A SPECIFIC
STRATEGY.
IF HE DOESN'T DO IT, I'VE
ALREADY FILED AN AUMF THAT WON'T
REQUIRE HIM TO DO IT, BUT
NONETHELESS WILL REQUIRE HIM TO
COME UP WITH A WRITTEN STRATEGY
AND THEN USE ALL THE RESOURCES.
MY CONCERN IS THIS: WE DON'T
HAVE MANY DISAGREEMENTS BETWEEN
SENATOR KAINE AND MYSELF.
I HAVE A GREAT DEAL OF RESPECT
FOR HIM.
WE SERVE ON THE SAME COMMITTEE.
I THINK THE PRESIDENT ALREADY
HAS THE AUTHORITY.
I THINK PERHAPS SENATOR McCAIN
IS SURE OF THAT.
NONETHELESS, WE CAN ELIMINATE
ALL DOUBT BY HAVING AN AUMF AND
SAY, PRESIDENT, YOU HAVE THE
AUTHORITY, WIN THIS WAR.
>> LET ME ASK YOU BOTH ABOUT
THAT ISSUE ABOUT CONGRESSIONAL
AGREEMENT TO GO FORWARD IN IRAQ
AND IN SYRIA AGAINST ISIL OR
ISIS.
SENATOR KAINE, DO YOU MAKE A
DISTINCTI BTWEEN
CONSULTATION, TALKING TO
CONGRESS ABOUT THIS IN ADVANCE,
AND ASKING CONGRESS'S
PERMISSION?
>> I DO, GWEN.
I HAVE A PRETTY STRICT
CONSTRUCTION VIEW OF WHAT I
THINK THESE CONSTITUTIONAL
POWERS ARE.
FORGIVE ME FOR BEING A BIG JAMES
MADISON FAN, A VIRGINIAN, BUT HE
CRAFTED THIS PRETTY CAREFULLY,
THAT IT IS CONGRESS THAT
INITIATES THE DECISION ABOUT
WHETHER TO BEGIN WAR.
THE PRESIDENT CAN TAKE STEPS TO
DEFEND THE NATION FROM AN
IMMINENT AND IMMEDIATE THREAT.
SO WHEN THE PRESIDENT BEGAN IN
EARLY AUGUST TRYING TO PROTECT
AMERICAN EMBASSY PERSONNEL,
THAT'S THE KIND OF THING A
COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF CAN DO, BUT
WHEN THE AIR STRIKE MISSION
EVOLVED TO WE NEED TO PROTECT
THIS DAM, OR AS THE PRESIDENT
SAID LAST WEEK ON TV, IT'S TIME
TO GO ON OFFENSE AGAINST ISIL, I
DON'T THINK THE PRESIDENT CAN
WAGE AN OFFENSIVE WAR UNDER
ARTICLE 2 OF THE CONSTITUTION OR
UNDER EITHER OF THE PREVIOUS
AUMFs WITHOUT CONGRESSIONAL
ENGAGEMENT.
BUT I DO AGREE WITH SENATOR
INHOFE.
IF IT'S A CLOSE QUESTION, I'VE
TALKED TO MY COLLEAGUES ON BOTH
SIDES OF THE AISLE.
I HAD LUNCH WITH THE VIRGINIA
DELEGATION TODAY, WHICH IS VERY
BIPARTISAN.
I'M TALKING TO CONSTITUENTS.
THEY SEE ISIL AS A THREAT.
THEY THINK A NARROW AND TAILORED
MISSION, STRAIGHTLY A MISSION OF
AIR STRIKES IS SOMETHING THEY
WOULD STRONGLY SUPPORT.
WHEN YOU SEE THAT SUPPORT IN THE
PUBLIC AND YOU START TO SEE IT
ACROSS THE AISLE, I THINK THAT
PRESENTS A GOOD OPPORTUNITY FOR
THE PRESIDENT TO ELIMINATE ALL
DOUBT AND MAKE SURE EVERYBODY IS
BEHIND THIS MISSION.
>> Ifill: SENATOR INHOFE, THE
AUMS, AUTHORIZATION THE USE
MILITARY FORCE, DO YOU KNOW
WHETHER THE LEADERS IN THE
SENATE OR THE HOUSE WHO ARE
MEETING WITH THE PRESIDENT
TODAY, EVEN WANT A VOTE ON THIS?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, I DON'T KNOW
THAT BECAUSE THIS MEETING THAT
THEY'RE HAVING RIGHT NOW WITH
THE PRESIDENT WAS ONE THAT WAS
UNEXPECTED AND NOT